Add tutorial for writing a backend datasource (#39)
grafana/tutorials: content/tutorials/build-a-data-source-backend-plugin.md

---

> title: Build a backend for a data source plugin

Reviewer: I noticed that titles in this document are inconsistently cased. I.e. some are title cased, and some are not. What is our standard in this regard?

Reviewer 2: This is documented in our [documentation style guide](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/contribute/style-guides/documentation-style-guide.md#headings).

All headings should be sentence cased:

Yes: _Build a backend for a data source plugin_
No: _Build a Backend for a Data Source Plugin_

Reviewer: Thanks @marcusolsson.

summary: Create a backend for your data source plugin.
id: build-a-data-source-backend-plugin
categories: ["plugins"]
tags: beginner
status: Published
authors: Grafana Labs
Feedback Link: https://github.com/grafana/tutorials/issues/new
weight: 70
---

{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Introduction" >}}

Grafana supports a wide range of data sources, including Prometheus, MySQL, and even Datadog. There's a good chance you can already visualize metrics from the systems you have set up. In some cases, though, you already have an in-house metrics solution that you’d like to add to your Grafana dashboards. This tutorial teaches you to build a support for your data source.

In this tutorial, you'll:

- Build a backend for your data source

> - Implement an health check for your data source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement a health check for your data source
```

- Enable alerting for your data source

### Prerequisites

> - Knowledge about how data source are implemented in the frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Knowledge about how data sources are implemented in the frontend.
```

- Grafana version 7.0+
- Go 1.14+
- [Mage](https://magefile.org/)

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Setup Your Environment" >}}

Reviewer: [We should use sentence case for our titles](https://github.com/grafana/tutorials/pull/39/files#r424298675):
```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Setup your environment" >}}
```

{{< tutorials/shared "set-up-environment" >}}

{{< /tutorials/step >}}
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Create a new plugin" >}}

To build a backend for your data source plugin, Grafana requires a binary that it can execute when it loads the plugin during start-up. In this guide, we will build a binary using our backend plugin SDK in Go.

The easiest way to get started is to clone one of our test data datasources. Navigate to the plugin folder that you configured in step 1 and type:

```
npx @grafana/toolkit plugin:create my-plugin
```

select `Backend Datasource Plugin` and follow the rest of the steps in the plugin scaffolding command.

```
cd my-plugin
```

> To build the plugin

Reviewer: It looks incomplete without a colon at the end:
```suggestion
To build the plugin:
```

```

> yarn install --pure-lockfile
>  yarn build
>  mage -v buildAll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yarn install --pure-lockfile
yarn build
mage -v buildAll
```

Author: This formating is required to align the lines on the websites. I also found it frustrating :)

Reviewer: Really? Wow :/

```

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Anatomy of a Backend Plugin" >}}

Reviewer: [We should use sentence case for our titles](https://github.com/grafana/tutorials/pull/39/files#r424298675):
```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Anatomy of a backend plugin" >}}
```

#### plugin.json

When building a backend plugin these fields are important:

| field      | description                                                                                                            |
| ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| backend    | Should be set to `true` for backend plugins. This tells Grafana that it should start a binary when loading the plugin. |
| executable | This is the name of the executable that Grafana expects to start.                                                      |
| alerting   | Should be set to true if your backend datasource supports alerting.                                                    |

In the next step we will look at the query endpoint!

{{< /tutorials/step >}}
{{< tutorials/step duration="2" title="Implement data queries" >}}

We begin by opening the file `/pkg/datasource/sample-datasource.go`. In this file you will see the `DatasourceInstance` struct which implements the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.

> The `QueryData` function on this struct is where the data fetching happens for a data source plugin.

Reviewer: If a function is on a struct, it should by definition be a method (a function should be free-standing):
```suggestion
The `QueryData` method on this struct is where the data fetching happens for a data source plugin.
```

Each request contains multiple queries to reduce traffic between Grafana and plugins.
So you need to loop over the slice of queries, process each query, and then return the results of all queries.

> In the tutorial we have extract a function named `query` to take care of each query model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the tutorial we have extracted a function named `query` to take care of each query model.
```

Since each plugin has their own unique query model, Grafana sends it to the backend plugin as JSON. Therefore the plugin needs
to `Unmarshal` the query model into something easier to work with.

As you can see the sample only returns static numbers. Try to extend the plugin to return other types of data.
You can read more about how to [build data frames in our docs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/developing/dataframes).

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Add Support for Health Checks" >}}

Reviewer: [We should use sentence case for our titles](https://github.com/grafana/tutorials/pull/39/files#r424298675):
```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Add support for health checks" >}}
```

---
title: Build a backend for a data source plugin
summary: Create a backend for your data source plugin.
id: build-a-data-source-backend-plugin
categories: ["plugins"]
tags: beginner
status: Published
authors: Grafana Labs
Feedback Link: https://github.com/grafana/tutorials/issues/new
weight: 70
---

{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Introduction" >}}

Grafana supports a wide range of data sources, including Prometheus, MySQL, and even Datadog. There's a good chance you can already visualize metrics from the systems you have set up. In some cases, though, you already have an in-house metrics solution that you’d like to add to your Grafana dashboards. This tutorial teaches you to build a support for your data source.

In this tutorial, you'll:

- Build a backend for your data source
- Implement an health check for your data source
- Enable alerting for your data source

### Prerequisites

- Knowledge about how data source are implemented in the frontend.
- Grafana version 7.0+
- Go 1.14+
- [Mage](https://magefile.org/)

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Set up your environment" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Setup Your Environment" >}}
```

{{< tutorials/shared "set-up-environment" >}}

{{< /tutorials/step >}}
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Create a new plugin" >}}

> To build a backend for your data source plugin grafana requires binary that Grafana can execute when it loads plugin during start-up. In this guide, we will build a binary using our backend plugin SDK in Go.

Reviewer 3: Suggested change: To build a backend for your data source plugin, Grafana requires a binary that it can execute when it loads the plugin during start-up. In this guide, we will build a binary using our backend plugin SDK in Go.

> To build a backend for your data source plugin grafana requires binary that Grafana can execute when it loads plugin during start-up. In this guide, we will build a binary using our backend plugin SDK in Go.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To build a backend for your data source plugin, Grafana requires a binary that it can execute when it loads the plugin during start-up. In this guide, we will build a binary using our backend plugin SDK in Go.
```

> The easiest way to get started is to clone one of our test data datasources. Navigate to the plugin folder that you configured in step 1 and type:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The quickest way to get started is to clone one of our test data datasources. To do this, navigate to the plugin folder that you configured in Step 1 and type:
```

Author: s/easiest/quick :+1:

```
npx @grafana/toolkit plugin:create my-plugin
```

> select `Backend Datasource Plugin` and follow the rest of the guide.

Reviewer 3: Clarity needed: "... follow the rest of the guide." Best to remove, unless you are referencing another guide.

Author: How about "select `Backend Datasource Plugin` and follow the rest of the steps in the plugin scaffolding command." ?

> select `Backend Datasource Plugin` and follow the rest of the guide.

Author: ```suggestion
select `Backend Datasource Plugin` and follow the rest of the steps in the plugin scaffolding command.
```

```
cd my-plugin
```

> To build the plugin

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To build the plugin, run the following;
```

```
yarn install --pure-lockfile
 yarn build
 mage -v buildAll
```

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Anatomy of a backend plugin" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Anatomy of a Backend Plugin" >}}
```

> The folders and files used to build the backend for the data source are

Author: ```suggestion
The filteralksjhdlfahsdffolders and files used to build the backend for the data source are
```

| file/folder         | description                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `Magefile.go`       | It’s not a requirement to use mage build files but we strongly recommend using that so that you can use the build steps provided in the plugin SDK. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `Magefile.go`       | It’s not a requirement to use mage build files, but we strongly recommend using it so that you can use the build steps provided in the plugin SDK. |
```

| `/src/plugins.json` | A JSON file describing the backend plugin                                                                                                           |
| `/pkg/plugin.go`    | Starting point of the plugin binary. We suggest that you keep this small and have all data source code in another package                           |
| `/pkg/datasource`   | The data source implementation in the plugin.                                                                                                       |

#### plugin.json

> When building a backend plugin these fields are important.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When building a backend plugin these fields are important:
```

| field      | description                                                                                                            |
| ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | backend    | should be set to `true` for backend plugins. This tells Grafana that it should start a binary when loading the plugin. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| backend    | Should be set to `true` for backend plugins. This tells Grafana that it should start a binary when loading the plugin. |
```

> | executable | is the name of the executable that grafana expects to start                                                            |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| executable | This is the name of the executable that Grafana expects to start                                                            |
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| executable | This is the name of the executable that grafana expects to start.                                                            |
```

> | executable | is the name of the executable that grafana expects to start                                                            |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| executable | This is the name of the executable that Grafana expects to start.                                                           |
```

> | alerting   | Should be set to true if your backend datasource supports alerting                                                     |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| alerting   | Should be set to true if your backend datasource supports alerting.                                                     |
```

#### /pkg/plugins.go

> This is file where you provide the backend SDK with handler functions by calling `backend.Serve({})`. <!-- TODO update serve function with new PR is merged -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the file where you provide the backend SDK with handler functions by calling `backend.Serve({})`. <!-- TODO update serve function with new PR is merged -->
```

> In this tutorial we are building a backend for a datasource so we will provide an implementation of the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we are building a backend for a datasource, so we will provide an example implementation of the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.
```

More about that in the next step!

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Manage data source configuration" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Manage Data Source Configuration" >}}
```

explain life cycle management for data sources.

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="2" title="Data source backend plugins" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="2" title="Data Source Backend Plugins" >}}
```

> Open the file `/pkg/datasource/sample-datasource.go` and you will see the `DatasourceInstance` struct which implements the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this step, we begin by opening the file `/pkg/datasource/sample-datasource.go`. In this file you will see the `DatasourceInstance` struct which implements the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.
```

> Open the file `/pkg/datasource/sample-datasource.go` and you will see the `DatasourceInstance` struct which implements the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We begin by opening the file `/pkg/datasource/sample-datasource.go`. In this file you will see the `DatasourceInstance` struct which implements the `backend.QueryDataHandler` interface.
```

> The `QueryData` function on this struct is where the data fetching happens for data source plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `QueryData` function on this struct is where the data fetching happens for a data source plugin.
```

Each request contains multiple queries to reduce traffic between Grafana and plugins.

> So you need to loop over the slice of queries, process each query and return the results of all queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So you need to loop over the slice of queries, process each query, and then return the results of all queries.
```

In the tutorial we have extract a function named `query` to take care of each query model.

> Since each plugin have their own unique query model, Grafana sends it to the backend plugin as JSON. Therefore the plugin needs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since each plugin has their own unique query model, Grafana sends it to the backend plugin as JSON. Therefore the plugin needs
```

> to Unmarshal the query model into something easier to work with.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to `Unmarshal` the query model into something easier to work with.
```

> As you can see the sample only returns static numbers. Try to extend the plugin to return other types of data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You might have noticed that the sample only returns static numbers. Try to extend the plugin to return other types of data.
```

You can read more about how to (build data frames in our docs)[https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/developing/dataframes].

{{< /tutorials/step >}}

> {{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Add support for health checks" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< tutorials/step duration="1" title="Add Support for Health Checks" >}}
```

> Implementing the health check handler allows Grafana to verify that a data source have been configured correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Implementing the health check handler allows Grafana to verify that a data source has been configured correctly.
```

> After a user have created a new datasource in Grafanas UI she can click the **Test** to verify that it works as expected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After a user has created a new datasource in Grafana's UI, she can click the **Test** to verify that it works as expected.
```

> In this sample datasource there is a 50/50% chance that the health check is successful. Make sure to return good error messages to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this sample data source, there is a 50% chance that the health check will be successful. Make sure to return appropriate error messages to
```

> the users, informing them about what is miss configured in the data source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the users, informing them about what is misconfigured in the data source.
```
